[AUDIO LOGO]
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>>REECE JONES: Hello,
I'm Reece Jones,
and welcome to module 9--
Passing Meaning
from Your Dreams.
Now that you're having memorable
and long lasting lucid dreams,
I'll describe to
you how to extract
meaning from them upon awakening
and integrate that meaning
into your waking life.
The world of dream
interpretation is a minefield.
All it takes is a cursory
glance over a new age bookshelf.
And you'll see that there are a
plethora of books, mainly dream
dictionaries, that
claim to reveal
the meanings behind your
dreams by simply flipping
to the relevant page and
reading out the explanation.
Whilst conceptually this
is quite a nice idea,
easy and effortless, in practice
they're as close to useless
as you can get.
Don't be fooled by
the oversimplification
and homogenisation
of such books.
They are not your
friends and, ultimately,
will not aid you in the same
way that personal interpretation
will.
Granted there are some
general dream themes
that can be ascribed some
overarching universal meanings.
But they are low
resolution interpretations.
So all things
considered, they're
not particularly useful.
For example, if you routinely
dream of natural disasters,
it's not too much
of a stretch to say
you might have
anxiety around events
that you perceive as
out of your control.
Sure.
But that interpretation
hardly goes
far towards meaningful,
personal growth and healing.
It's a vague clue
but nothing more.
And the clue might, ultimately,
be way off the mark,
depending on your
own personal story
and what you
subjectively associate
with natural disasters.
With that in mind
then, if you insist
on using some sort
of dream dictionary
to interpret your
dreams, it should
be a personally curated one.
You can go about this
by simply writing down
associations you think of when
imagining a particular theme.
So, for example, what do
dogs conjure up for you?
As in how do they make you feel?
And what connections
spark in your mind
when you think of them?
Cute maybe?
Love perhaps?
Responsibility?
That's a start.
So write all of
those things down.
And begin to log
them alphabetically.
Keep on doing this.
And you'll eventually have
your very own dream dictionary.
Even this isn't
foolproof, though,
because life is a constantly
shifting kaleidoscope
of feelings and emotions.
For example, dogs
might very well
mean all of those
things to you now.
But what about a
year down the line?
Will they still represent
the same things?
Perhaps not.
Maybe you got bitten by a dog
in the interim, for example.
If so, redo the exercise.
And see what you write down now.
Fear maybe?
Unsafe perhaps?
Pain?
Even keeping your personal dream
dictionary updated like this
is relatively low
resolution, though,
because the conscious
connections you make whilst
awake might not be the same
subconscious connections
you make whilst you dream.
In fact, it's
probably safe to say
there's only a weak
connection between the two.
And so as you can see, even
with a personally curated dream
dictionary, there's something
inherently unreliable
about them.
What to do then?
Is there a better,
more reliable way
to extract meaning
from your dreams?
Well, of course.
And it's nowhere near as
complicated as people make out.
Firstly, I'd suggest
avoiding reading
too much into the symbology
behind your dreams.
Whilst I don't doubt
it's sometimes present,
it can be quite
hard to decipher.
And you're once again
opening yourself up
to potential misinterpretation.
Instead, you should
simply do this.
Upon awakening, when
jotting down your dreams,
at the bottom of the page,
write down your strong lingering
emotions.
For example, you might write
down anxious and upset.
If so, it seems safe
to assert that there's
something either consciously
or subconsciously playing
on your mind there, something
that's worthy of exploration
perhaps.
You should also take note
of any strong lingering
imagery or anything that stood
out to you as particularly
strange or unique.
Then see if you can
figure out the connections
that your brain is making
between its experience
knowledge, waking, and its
experimental knowledge,
dreaming.
For example, maybe you dreamed
of an old childhood friend
as your college professor.
What has your brain done
there, do you think?
It's merging two
different worlds.
But why?
Well, on some
level, maybe you've
always thought of your old
friend as wise and teacherly.
And only now is your
brain getting around
to experimenting more deeply
with that thought, playing it
out in real time.
If so, explore the thought
further once awake,
and see what feeling
it leaves you with.
The lingering
feelings are always
the key to unlocking the greater
meaning behind your dreams.
Don't automatically ascribe
a searing importance
to any of this, though.
Overanalyzation is real.
And if you're hell bent on
finding meaning in everything,
you're going to drive yourself
insane in the process.
So try this instead.
Only go deep on interpretation
if the dream is recurring.
For example, if you
have a dream about being
in an out of control
car and you wake up
with strong feelings of fear
and anxiety, jot it down.
And move on.
However, if you keep
on having dreams
about being in an
out-of-control car
and you continue waking up
with strong feelings of fear
and anxiety, now is the
time to stop and listen.
What is the dream
demonstrating here?
The fact it's recurring
suggests it's not
some fleeting random series of
images cooked up by the brain,
sorting through
memories of the day.
Instead it suggests
something bigger,
something that's left an
imprint on your psyche somehow.
And now's the time
to do some digging.
Could it be literal?
Quite possibly.
As I said earlier, I
wouldn't automatically
presume your dream is
talking exclusively
in symbols and metaphors.
It does seem to at
times but not always.
Sometimes you're dreaming of
being in an out-of-control car
simply because you're
scared of cars.
Maybe you were in a car
crash when you were younger.
And it's traumatized you.
If that's the case, I
suggest referring back
to the previous module
and experimenting
with some exposure therapy.
Train yourself to recognize
out-of-control cars
as a dream sign.
Get lucid when it next happens.
And integrate the fear by
repeated lucid exposure to it.
But maybe there is
some symbolism at play.
Maybe you keep on dreaming
about out-of-control cars
because you hate the thought
of being out of control
in your waking life.
Perhaps you're overly
orderly and organized.
And you like to have
as much of your life
under your own personal
control as possible,
which is fine up to a point.
But perhaps the dream is
displaying a subconscious
desire to loosen its
grip on the wheel.
Perhaps it's demonstrating to
itself that regardless of how
much it tries to control
every last aspect of life,
there will always be certain
things that cannot be foreseen
or accounted for.
So if that's your takeaway,
write down your thoughts.
And sit with them.
Listen to them.
Mull them over.
And return to the dream over
the coming days and weeks
to see if your
feelings change at all.
However, all of
these techniques pale
in comparison to
interpreting the dream
whilst inside the dream itself.
When lucid, you can evaluate in
real time how specific events
are making you
feel and experiment
with different approaches
to integrate those feelings.
You don't have to look
back on them in retrospect.
You can take note of
the details as they
happen, which make for much
more convincing litmus tests.
Perhaps you can even experiment
with talking to the dream
directly, asking what it's
trying to impart, if anything.
It's not uncommon to
receive a literal response
from a narrated dream
voice when you do this.
And whilst I'd be hesitant to
believe what the voice says
without question, it's another
useful tidbit of information
to log upon awakening
and mull over
in the coming days and weeks.
Perhaps it's nonsense.
But then again,
perhaps it's not.
The biggest takeaway here is
to be your own interpreter.
Don't rely on others to
interpret your dreams for you.
Believe that you'll get
to the bottom of things.
And given the right time,
effort, and dedication,
you will.